From New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> It is a high-stakes game of blockade
chicken. [music] The US asserts control
over the Strait of Hormuz. Iran, for its
part, threatens retaliation. For the
past [music] 2 days, the United States
has enforced a risky naval blockade of
Iran.
Designed to [music] end the war on
American terms. So, what are we doing?
We're blockading the ports in Iran where
they get oil and gas shipments. Without
oil and gas money, Iran has no economy.
Today, a look at the strategy [music]
behind the blockade, the dangers that it
poses,
>> [music]
>> and whether or not it's actually
working.
We can't let a country
blackmail or extort
uh the world, cuz that's what they're
doing. They're really blackmailing the
world. We're [music] not going to let
that happen.
I spoke with White House correspondent
David [music] Sanger,
energy reporter Rebecca Elliott, and
military [music] correspondent Eric
Schmitt.
It's Wednesday, April 15th.
David, Rebecca, Eric, thank you for
joining us for this round table
discussion. We appreciate it.
Great to be here. Thanks for having me.
>> Thank you. David, I want to start with
where the idea for this blockade comes
from. It emerges right after Iran
basically sent Vice President J.D. Vance
packing. Sends him home from
negotiations in Pakistan with no deal.
And suddenly, the Trump administration
is confronting a pretty messy situation,
a ceasefire without Iran letting go of
control over the Strait of Hormuz,
this huge, important shipping channel.
And so, that seems to be where this
blockade begins. Right?
You're absolutely right, Michael, that
it seemed intolerable to the
administration that you could end this
war or move toward an end of it with the
Iranians exercising control over who
gets through the strait. Because through
the whole 47 years of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard government in place
since 1979,
they basically let all traffic go
through without tolls.
And now, all of a sudden, they managed
to stop traffic.
They managed to declare that there would
be tolls. We're still trying to figure
out how much they actually collected.
Literally, when we say tolls, literally
like the one you pass on the highway.
Yeah, $2 million.
Imagine every time your Easy Pass went
through, it put $2 million bucks on your
credit card, right?
This was not a situation the US could
live with. So, what the US Navy needed
to do was reverse the dynamic. Make sure
that it wasn't the Iranians who were
controlling traffic through the strait,
but that it was the US Navy that was.
And that sounds like a fairly
straightforward process given the size
of the US Navy, but in fact, it turns
out it's looking like it will be pretty
complicated to execute.
>> Okay. So, Eric, just define this pretty
brute force military concept of
a naval blockade, cuz it's its own act
of aggression. That's right. By
definition, a blockade is an act of war.
And what it means is one country is
basically going to use its military
might, its forces to block the transit
of ships from other countries. That can
either be through the threat of force or
actual boarding of ships and seizing
them. And in this case, the United
States Navy has shown up with some
10,000 sailors aboard more than a dozen
warships, from aircraft carriers to
destroyers to the ships that carry
Marines. And they're essentially parked
outside of the Strait of Hormuz,
basically waiting for any ships to come
either from the Persian Gulf or trying
to get from where they are in the
Arabian Sea into the Gulf itself.
Basically, the idea is to strangle
Iran's economy, but specifically,
Rebecca,
to strangle its oil.
That's right. And what's so interesting
is that Iran has been able to maintain
oil going through the strait in a way
that its neighbors have not. So, it's
exerting this control over the waterway
by attacks and threats of attacks.
So, the vast majority of the oil that
has been getting through has come from
Iran. So, it's continuing Iran to make
money from oil to, in a sense, I assume
fund its own war efforts. Exactly. It's
just a add to Rebecca's point here,
it's not only the overall Iranian
economy that's dependent on this
revenue, it's particularly the
government and within that, the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps, Mhm. which
gets almost all of its revenue and thus
its ability to pursue the war from oil
exports. Got it. And just to be sure
we're on the same page here, is the goal
ultimately
to wrest back control of the strait, or
is the goal to create a blockade that
would bring Iran back to the negotiating
table so that this
war actually never reignites?
Well, as I understand it, it's really
both. I mean, they don't want to live in
a world in which the Iranians step out
at any moment to control the strait. If
that's the case, then the US has to be
prepared for a lengthy presence around
the Strait of Hormuz. But the real goal
here is to get the Iranians to move in
the negotiations. Remember, this got
announced right after Right. Vice
President Vance left Islamabad
fundamentally empty-handed. We've since
learned that they are in a pretty
high-stakes negotiation on a number of
points, but the biggest difference is
whether or not Iran has to give up its
nuclear stockpiles and whether it's got
to agree to give up all enrichment of
uranium. But whatever it is, the strait
and control over it is the leverage
President Trump's trying to exercise
here. Okay. A final question
about the blockade before we get to how
it's actually going so far, which is
if you're the president and you're
deciding to operationalize this
theoretical blockade, what are the risks
that you're assessing
as you're thinking about making this
real. I'll put that to all three of you.
What kind of blowback boomerang can you
expect as you imagine suddenly creating
this naval barrier
around the strait?
Well, one major risk, of course, is that
the IRGC, that Iran itself, lashes out.
They have threatened to attack these US
Navy ships, and so you could have a
major escalation of the fighting again
based over the ships coming into the
strait or even standing back outside.
So, that would be one major risk that
the president would have to weigh.
There's a second one I can think of, and
I'm sure Rebecca's got a long list as
well. It's China. Mhm. So, 90% of the
oil that Iran ships out is headed to
China.
Much of it is on Chinese crude,
Chinese-flagged ships.
The president's supposed to go to
Beijing in about 4 weeks, and what he
was hoping was going to be this meeting
all about sort of a new détente between
China and the United States. There were
supposed to be trade deals and security
understandings and so forth. And all of
a sudden, what's looming over it?
Whether or not these Chinese ships that
pick up their oil in Iran
get turned back by the US Navy. Mhm.
That is not the kind of scene they want
to be confronting, especially at a
moment when there are reports, as Eric
and others have reported in The Times,
that the Chinese have been considering
aiding the Iranians with some kind of
arms. Right. A simple, efficient way to
really piss off your superpower
adversary is to start to systematically
deprive them of oil. Rebecca,
any risks you want to identify? Yes, I'd
say a third big category of risk is that
Iran responds by restarting attacks on
energy infrastructure throughout the
Persian Gulf.
>> Mhm. And that is one that carries really
long-term risks for the global energy
system and the global economy.
Because as you do more damage to the
region's infrastructure, prevent
refineries from operating, you risk
taking energy offline for a long period
of time.
>> Right.
>> And already, the International Energy
Agency has estimated that more than 80
energy sites in the region have been
damaged, and that bringing production
back to pre-war levels could take up to
2 years. Wow.
So, this blockade has now gone from
strategic theory to reality. So, let's
turn to what it's looked like over the
past 48 hours or so, and whether it's
working for the US or creating a bunch
of strategic boomerang and blowbacks
that were perhaps unintended, but now
problematic. Eric, to start, can you
describe the blockade as it now stands
around the strait.
So, as I mentioned before, the US Navy
is positioned outside the Strait of
Hormuz, kind of waiting for any ships
bound for Iranian ports. So, what
President Trump is calling a blockade is
really more of a quarantine. They're
monitoring these ships using drones,
using other open-source information
about where these ships are coming from
or where they're going to. And if
there's a suspect ship, they can get on
the radio and basically call and
determine if that's a ship that they
might need to board. And if it got to
that point, they could actually send
boarding parties aboard. These would be
Marines or specially trained Navy
personnel, could be Navy SEALs. They
could arrive by boat, they could come by
helicopter and fast rope down onto these
ships
>> Oh. to inspect the cargo. This would
really be only if the ships continue a
pace. One of the reasons why you have
this blockade or quarantine is really to
set a deterrent. The idea that the US
Navy is out there and to the shipping
companies whose cargo is moving, do they
really want to have the United States
seize this cargo? Do they really want to
challenge the United States? I think
most of the hundreds of ships that are
already on scene, whether they're inside
the Persian Gulf or outside, are kind of
staying put. And what we're now waiting
for to see if there's any Iranian-backed
ships that that dare them. Well, so far
are any ships carrying Iranian oil, the
thing the US blockade is meant to stop?
Are any of those ships getting through
the strait since this blockade started?
The short answer, Michael, is appears
not.
>> Hm. The Central Command, which oversees
the US military operations in this part
of the world, issued a statement 24
hours into the blockade saying that
there had been no interdictions, there'd
been no violations of the blockade. And
in fact, there had been six vessels
coming out of Iranian ports on the Gulf
of Oman, on the Iranian coast, that had
turned around after they'd been
contacted by a US Navy ships. So, the US
military is pointing to that to say,
"Look, this is working so far for the
ships that we want it to affect." So, in
these very early hours, and I guess few
days of this blockade, this
is succeeding if you're President Trump
and the US military. Well, I'd say it's
succeeding halfway. It looks like for
now, he has stopped the Iranians from
shipping oil out and thus fueling their
economy and their government. What we
don't know yet, Michael, is can the
commerce that's been bottled up in the
Gulf, ships that belong to the UAE or
other Arab states who are trying to ship
their oil and cargo out, can they get
past the Iranians so that the US can
free them out to the rest of the world?
And that's what the future of the global
economy in the next few months may
depend on. Right, cuz at the end of the
day, and this is going to sound like a
head-spinning tongue twister, this is
ultimately a blockade by the US of a
blockade by Iran, which makes it really
messy.
Exactly.
And a big question for the global
economy is does this mean that no oil is
going to be getting out of the Persian
Gulf?
Or [music] does it allow and does it
give shippers the confidence to make
[music] that run?
Okay, we'll discuss that right after we
take a very short break.
>> [music]
>> So, let's talk about what's happening to
everyone else in the world when it comes
to this blockade. So far, as you all
just established before the break, the
Iranian oil seems to be bottled up
because of this blockade, a success
strategically if you're the US trying to
disrupt the Iranian economy and get the
Iranians back to the negotiating table
to end this war. But if you are the UAE,
if you are the United States, if you're
Russia, what does this blockade mean for
you so far, Eric? Do we have any
intelligence about whether cargo ships
are seeing the US blockade as a safety
net that lets them get through the
strait?
Well, [snorts] just before coming on the
program, a US official told me that as
many as 20 commercial vessels have now
been able to transit through the strait
in the first 24 hours or so. Hm. Now,
the official didn't describe exactly
what kind of ships, but it's assumed
this is a combination of tankers, of
cargo ships and other things. But we
really need more detail to see if this
is an early indication of a broader
stream, like as Rebecca said, of
shippers who are now more confident that
they can run the gauntlet that they
weren't before, or if this is just a
momentary spurt of getting through with
the US Navy standing by that really
doesn't have a long-term effect.
>> Hm. Rebecca, what are your sources
telling you about the trepidation level
of the captains of these ships and the
companies that own them and have to pay
the insurance levels that they're paying
now to try to go through the strait?
I would say it's very high.
And increasingly, the people I speak
with are starting to ask not what is it
going to take to reopen the strait,
but will the strait ever go back to the
way it was before the war when there was
free passage, no toll, and relatively
little risk of being attacked?
And many people think probably not.
Let's now turn to that question.
Basically, the long-term
future of the strait and what it's going
to look like. Is it going to be
something that over time the Iranians
just control, perhaps in a peace deal?
Or does this become some sort of a joint
operation over time?
Does the strait ever get restored to its
pre-war operations? Can that genie ever
be put back into the bottle, David? So,
I'm with Rebecca. I don't think that
you're going to see it go back to the
way it was anytime soon because the
Iranians have discovered this kind of
superpower they have. They had never
before tried to control the strait, and
suddenly they discovered that after much
of their military has been destroyed,
they have the ability, just by dropping
a few mines or threatening ships with
shoulder-fired missiles, to basically
bottle up everything that's in the
Persian Gulf.
>> Hm. So, we have heard a couple of
proposals. At one point, President Trump
just briefly suggested that maybe it
would be run by him and the new
Ayatollah Khamenei.
That would be a business partnership
[laughter] I'd like to go cover. There
have been more serious proposals about
creating a kind of international
consortium that not only monitored what
was going through, but maybe charged and
divided up the tolls. You could imagine
Iran would be a part of that.
>> Hm. Oman, which is straight across the
other side of the strait, the United
States, which would be providing
security, and then you could imagine
bringing in any number of countries that
are dependent on what's traveling
through the strait, starting with China,
maybe even India.
And of course, the Europeans. Now, that
would require a level of international
cooperation and diplomatic sharing of
power that so far the Trump
administration has not shown a great
interest in around the world. Right.
>> And so, this would be a really
interesting test of building a an
international coalition. So, David and
Rebecca, what you seem to both be saying
is that at the end of this conflict, the
strait will never again be like the
Atlantic Ocean or like the Pacific Ocean
and be a free international waterway in
which commerce occurs pretty much
unimpeded and free. Never say never, but
that is certainly something that more
and more people are facing at this
moment.
And when we're talking about the oil
market and energy demand, that leads in
a few different directions.
>> Yeah, what how do you start to plan
around a world where maybe the strait is
tolled to a degree that's not tolerable?
Doesn't that require a whole new level
of alternatives? I would divide it into
three general buckets. One is the
possibility of building more alternative
routes from Gulf countries to world
markets
that get around the Strait of Hormuz. We
already have a couple of those options
in Saudi Arabia and the UAE, and they
have been helping to get oil out to a
very big degree during this war.
>> or pipelines? Pipelines. Hm. Now, that
is complicated as well. There are only a
certain number of countries that are
able to get oil from one coast to
another without running across another
country's territory.
>> Right. So, then you get into the
cooperation conversation again.
That's one bucket. Another bucket is
does this increase demand for oil
elsewhere in the world that you can get
without running the risk of going
through the strait?
And the third is whenever oil is more
expensive, it makes alternatives more
attractive. And those alternatives
include nuclear energy,
solar power, batteries, and we're
already seeing many of those
conversations pick up around the world.
Hm. So, the entire world of energy and
energy infrastructure could end up
changing because of this war and to a
degree because of this blockade and that
could end up long outlasting the
conflict itself. In the long term
Michael, I think that's exactly what
could happen and of course it's been
different wars, different conflicts that
have shaped our energy status in the
past. But the way I try to think about
this in the short term
is that we are now entering a contest
over which country, the United States or
Iran
can endure the pain of this blockade
over the next few months.
>> Mhm. The Iranians are betting that it's
Trump who is going to have to back off
because the closer we get to the midterm
elections with gas prices going up and
now the president saying and the energy
secretary saying they may stay up
through the rest of the year.
>> Right. That's a big political problem
for the Republican Party and for Donald
Trump and for his remaining term because
if he loses both the House and the
Senate in part because of high energy
prices his domestic agenda is basically
going to be over.
>> Right. And Iran knows this. I mean their
leadership in internet memes taunts
Trump about gas prices. In fact, their
lead negotiator, the speaker of the
Iranian parliament basically said as he
left Islamabad
you could be nostalgic for five or six
dollar a gallon gas. Mhm. The US has a
different bet which is what they failed
to do militarily in 38 or 39 days of
war, they can finish off economically by
cutting off Iran's main source of
revenue by specifically cutting off the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
and that they will in the end come back
to the negotiating table and as
President Trump put it cry uncle. Mhm.
We're going to do whatever you want to
do. So far that hasn't happened but the
president is testing to see where that
point is. And the fact of the matter is
if anybody tells you they know which
side is not going to be able to
withstand the pain first
uh
I'm not sure I'd believe them yet.
>> Mhm. Eric, final question to you.
How sustainable is this blockade if it
lasts for a while? The next negotiation
session
between the US and Iran is on Thursday
but the gap between the two countries on
all the major sticking points, whether
that's the nuclear program or Israel's
ongoing war in Lebanon remains enormous.
How sustainable
is the blockade if it keeps being
required by the US? Well, the Pentagon
has said that it can sustain this
blockade as long as the president needs
to.
>> Mhm. The problem is it would come at a
cost of what the military has to do
elsewhere around the world. It has
already drawn away ships and munitions
that are badly needed the Indo-Pacific
to possibly counter China to deal with
North Korea in a conflict there. They're
also pulling away interceptors and other
bombs and missiles from the European
command which could possibly have gone
to Ukraine. This blockade operation
alone is drawing in some 10,000 US Navy,
Marine Corps and other service
personnel. The overall operation has
caught about more than 50,000 if they
have to remain focused on this region
because we don't know for sure that
hostilities won't break out and the
president won't resume dropping bombs
and missiles on Iran. Mhm. Well David,
that actually makes me want to ask you
the very last question.
Is this war as a full-on war as we think
about that word
likely over?
Because yes, we're talking about a
ceasefire that hasn't solved all the
major problems and we're talking about a
blockade but for the most part these two
sides are not shooting at each other
right now and I imagine there's a lot of
pressure for it to stay that way.
I think there is. I think it would be
very hard for President Trump to go back
in and conduct the kind of military
operation that he ran for 38 days. His
base was fragmenting over it. Congress
was clearly frustrated that they had
never been consulted much less asked for
a war declaration.
Allies were not coming to America's aid.
But it's not only President Trump who
understands that, the Iranians
understand it too.
They also want to have this war over
because the effects on them and on an
economy that was fragile before the
fighting started has got to be huge. And
so now the question is not whether or
not the war ends
but on whose terms it ends.
>> [music]
>> David Eric, Rebecca
thank you all.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
On Tuesday afternoon, the leaders of
France and Britain [music] said they
would develop their own plan to reopen
the Strait of Hormuz.
The plan involving a broad coalition of
governments
>> [music]
>> is expected to begin only after the war
is over and may exclude [music]
the United States.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
[music]
My name is Lana Drewes.
In 2018 while I was living and working
as a model in Beverly Hills
I had contact with Eric [music] Swalwell
on three separate occasions after
meeting him socially. On Tuesday [music]
a woman said that Democratic
Representative Eric Swalwell raped
[music] her in a California hotel room.
The latest in a series of accusations
[music] that have ended Swalwell's
campaign for governor of California
and his career in Congress. My delay in
[music] taking action against Eric was
driven by fear, not doubt.
Fear of his political power
his [music] background as an attorney
and his family law enforcement ties.
During a news [music] conference Lana
Drewes said that after promising to take
her to a political event
Swalwell [music] instead drugged her and
then assaulted her.
Swalwell has [music] denied sexually
assaulting women but has apologized for
quote mistakes in [music] judgment. I
stand with the other women who have come
forward
and I [music] will be making reports to
law enforcement shortly with my
attorneys.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Caitlyn
O'Keefe
Ricky Newberry
>> [music]
>> and Jack Disseldorp.
It was edited by Lisa Chow
contains music by Alicia B Eub [music]
and Dan Powell.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for the daily.
>> I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.
>> [music]